[music]
>> Pushkin
It dawns on all of us at some point
before adolescence
that there is something called smart
and it is really rare.
Only a small number of people are smart.
And then, a few years later
you have an even more important
realization, which is that smart comes
in many different varieties.
I feel I spent my adolescence cataloging
all the varieties of smart.
There was my high school friend who had
a mind that was a giant sponge [music]
that could soak up what seemed like an
infinite amount of knowledge. Then I got
to college, I met a guy whose thinking
seemed effortless.
He could be distracted or
procrastinating or dancing at a party,
it didn't matter. Somewhere in a back
room in his brain was a giant computer
that just quietly hummed along solving
one problem after another.
Oh, then I had a friend who had a mind
that she attached to a giant V8 with
like 800 horsepower.
I'd never seen smart attached to energy
like that before.
I spent a lot of time in college working
on my taxonomy of smart and along the
way I had a third realization
that every kind of exceptional
intelligence
has a downside. A price that person had
to pay for being one of the chosen few.
And every time I think of that third
rule, I think of my old college friend
Jim Balsillie.
My mistake and naivety was
to think that people were were with me.
>> [music]
>> So,
you're flying around the world, you're
trying to get people onside and [snorts]
you think they're onside, but they're
not. Mhm. Mhm. And you get [music]
blindsided.
My name is Malcolm Gladwell. You're
listening to Revisionist History, my
podcast about things overlooked and
[music] misunderstood. This episode is
the fourth in our series on mistakes,
inspired by Michael Linton and Josh
Steiner's book From Mistakes [music] to
Meaning.
And this story is about the big mistake
that changed the life of my old college
friend Jim, [music]
who I will say without reservation is
possessed of one of the most remarkable
minds I have ever met
and paid a price [music] for it.
Um
what was it like for you
growing up? You went to
you grew up in Peterborough?
Yes, I did. And you went to a public
high school in Peterborough?
Yes.
Peterborough, for those unfamiliar with
Southern Ontario, is just over an hour
east and north of Toronto. It is to
Toronto roughly what, I don't know,
Poughkeepsie is to New York City.
My dad was a tradesman, my mom was a
homemaker.
>> [laughter]
>> Your high school I
suspect was a lot like my high school.
We're not talking about Exeter.
No.
>> [laughter]
>> Although, I actually I I don't mean to
diss it because I got an amazing
education from fabulous teachers. So,
what was it like
to be You were the smart kid
in high school.
Yes. What was that like?
Uh it's um I I I don't think they know
what to do with you.
Um so, I think you're just
I think there's a premium on compliance.
I think we've learned now that
high-energy kids need to run around and
when they're young until they're tired,
but kind of making them sit at a at a
desk all day is
when they're young is really, really
difficult. Are you talking about
yourself?
Yes, very much so. And uh it was just
incredibly boring and um you just look
at the clock and count minutes. And uh
yeah, it was Did you get in trouble in
high school?
Yeah, yeah, a few times. Well, one time
when I was in grade seven,
a teacher
did a long formula across three or four
boards and
he he said, "Where did I go wrong?" And
from the back of the class, I said,
"When you were born." And uh
And [laughter]
How come I don't And he took me out of
the class and he held me up by the
scruff of the neck and I was My feet
were off the ground against the locker
and he had me taken out of the math
class and I was just
It seemed funny at the time and then um
And then a couple months later, there
was a there was a provincial math
contest for, you know, the 10 million
people in Ontario and
as a grade seven, I'd came first in
grade seven and eights in Ontario.
He was the best math student in the
entire province, but he wasn't allowed
in his own math class.
What did your parents make of you?
Uh
when I was 4 years old,
they took me to some child psychologist,
which was
uh they were didn't know what to do.
What were you doing at four that led
your parents to take you to a child
psychologist? I don't know. I don't
know. We we're we're we're kind of
Presbyterian Southern
Ontario, so you don't really talk a lot.
You don't sort of
You just sort of carry on and uh so you
you don't see It's not like this rich
unpacking of psychologist kids or
something like that. Everybody's just
you know, it's kind of go play outside
and you know, try try to make it home
for dinner kind of thing, right? That
was a It was a very different era. Very
different era.
In my taxonomy of smart, Jim has a whole
category to himself.
I don't mean this in a derogatory way,
but Jim has cunning.
My brain, I was beginning to understand
at that time, likes to take the long way
Jim only took shortcuts. If life was a
maze, most of us stumble along,
retracing our steps from one dead end to
another dead end, until we finally get
to the other side. Jim would see the
right path instantly. Or, more
accurately, he would recognize that
there's actually a gap in the hedge
right at the start, which no one had
ever noticed before, with a straight
shot to the finish, and he'd just cut
through there. And by the time the rest
of us stumbled to the end, he'd won the
trophy, gone home, changed, and was
having a beer. This is Canada, remember.
Not long after college, Jim met an
engineer named Mike Lazaridis, who had a
little company called Research In
Motion, RIM, as it was known. Jim
becomes co-CEO, and to the surprise of
absolutely no one who knew him, builds
RIM into a multi-billion-dollar
juggernaut.
Remember 15 years ago when everyone had
a BlackBerry? First real smartphone with
those clickety-clackety buttons. That
was Jim. [music]
So, why don't you use a BlackBerry
anymore?
In the business school case studies
about the fall of BlackBerry, there are
pages and pages on the rapidly shifting
smartphone landscape of the early
aughts. Strategic miscalculations, the
cloud of Apple, all the things that
business school case studies like to
dwell on.
But I think there's a simpler
explanation. I think you need to
understand something about my old friend
Jim.
Set the set the stage for me.
Sure.
Um
It's interesting because when you talk
about mistakes,
and and I do think the
the biggest mistake in my career, when I
look back, um with RIM we had a fork in
the road, and and I mismanaged the board
relationship at a time where I wanted to
go left and they decided to go right and
and that not only changed the trajectory
of the company,
>> [music]
>> it changed the trajectory of the global
technology industry.
So, tell me, what what do you mean by
you wanted to go left and they wanted to
go right? And we're what we're talking
about what? First of all, let's let's
date this. What what era are we talking
about?
We're talking 2011 and um
a couple things were going on. Um
one, our hardware business had grown a
lot, but it was under pressure, huge
pressure.
And there were new
uh
uh operating systems, one from Apple and
one from [music] Google, that were
putting tremendous pressure on our
hardware sales.
But, our services business was where we
made all our money, our messaging
services. So, at that at that year,
2011, we had more profit from our
services business than Facebook had
total revenue at that time. Going to
talk about BlackBerry, the beleaguered
smartphone maker. BlackBerry CEO himself
has admitted one of the reasons they're
struggling is because they didn't
innovate fast enough.
Let me give you my 2012 prediction.
>> [music]
>> RIM, the company that brings us the
BlackBerry, I'm predicting that they're
going to be on the verge of bankruptcy.
There were two sides to BlackBerry in
those years. There was the phone, that
rectangular plastic block with a
physical keyboard, and there was also a
messaging function, BlackBerry
Messenger, BBM. That was what Jim is
calling the service business. Hardware
and services were separate, and Jim
thought that BlackBerry should get out
of the physical phone business, which
wasn't making any money anymore, and
just be in the BlackBerry Messenger
business.
And so, I'd spend a year and a half
buying companies to avail a service to
make it an open service, and I'd spent
time with the carriers, and they were
going to launch it with SMS, call it SMS
2.0, and it had storage and rich media
functions. What he was imagining was
turning BlackBerry Messenger into the
backbone of the entire smartphone
ecosystem. So, it's effectively what we
know of as social media right now, um
and there was a small um
uh emerging player called WhatsApp that
worked cross-platform, but we had a
multiple of users as they did, and so
yeah, I'd I'd beavered away um
on it, and
I thought the board was on side. I I
thought everyone was on side.
Apple had just come out with the first
iPhones. Jim was thinking that there was
no way little BlackBerry, as fast as it
was growing, could compete with Apple or
giants like Samsung.
But, BlackBerry Messenger was a
different matter.
BlackBerry was dominant in that space.
And in the version of the world Jim
imagined, your texting and social media
would come bundled with your wireless
contract.
So, the minute you hooked up your new
iPhone or Samsung phone to a wireless
provider, you'd be using BBM.
Let's stop there, and let's go back, and
I want to make sure everyone understands
what we're talking about here. So, is in
many of us still have a BlackBerry.
And
there's two components here. There is
the physical
phone,
and you there's also
you're talking about a service that
could live a messaging service that
could either live on a BlackBerry or
live anywhere.
Correct. Yeah. That would be the
equivalent of what WhatsApp became?
Is that the mess model?
>> Facebook
and WhatsApp became. That's correct.
Well, but at the time was BBM
effectively
was social media. Mhm. Uh and the
difference would be is it would be in
your subscription plan as part of your
texting rather than an ad-supported
social media uh service. Yeah. So, that
the goal here or the play was to make
the
the the the Blackberry services business
the backbone of
basically new media of the of new social
media.
That's correct. And it would be embedded
in your cellular plan. And I worked with
the carriers, the major CEOs throughout
Europe, and
already had two of the big three
uh committed in US. So, all you need is
enough to keep it going and it
eventually tips. So, yeah, people would
have said, "I'm migrating to an Android.
I'm migrating to an iOS. I'll just take
my BBM with me. I'll maintain all my
contacts, all my And you remember you
you you had
digital, you know, voice over IP
happening on those things at that time.
You had pictures. You could You could
store them. You established groups.
You had status of delivery. All All the
things that were
social media that was emerging at that
time, we had that in in the BBM.
Well, how many users BBM users did you
have at the beginning of 2012, say, or
the beginning of 2011? Uh 80 million. 80
million. So, you what What What would
you put the probability of
of BBM becoming [music] the dominant the
becoming this kind of dominant player in
the
um in the telecommunications world if
you had gone that route? Do you think
you could have How How big do you think
you you could have grown it?
Well, it it it
the probability that it would have
stayed a major force is 100%.
That's the vision he pitches to the
board. We're trapped in the maze along
with everyone else. Here's the shortcut.
Was he right? Of course he was. Jim's
always right.
So,
yeah, in the immortal words of Yogi
Berra, when you
reach a fork in the road, you got to
take it.
>> [laughter]
>> So, you go Tell me about the board
meeting. You go to You go to the board
You
You go to the board and what happens?
Well, they
we'd had the board had brought in
consultants.
And I was
explaining this and presenting this and
talking about the strategy
thinking
they were with me and and really I was
just
speaking into
just a vacuum of of perceptivity and
interest to it. Why weren't they with
you?
I think it was too radical what I was
trying to do.
I I'd not spent near enough time with
them explaining it and debating it and
which is a lesson I learned.
And and you've
really driven the company strategies for
20 years
to a $20 billion company and you
you think you they'll just
follow you.
They say, "What are you talking about?
We're a company that makes phones."
And SMS 2.0, Jim's vision for the next
stage of BlackBerry is killed just a few
weeks before it was supposed to launch.
I wasn't consulted.
I didn't know what was happening. It was
just on the agenda, presented and
>> [music]
>> decided. And And I called the lead
director after that and I said, "What
what's going on here? This will kill the
company." And they said, "The decision's
made."
And so I uh
I resigned from the board and sold my
shares, the remaining shares at that
time. And uh
And they were extremely confident for a
year and a half marketing campaign,
Super Bowl ads,
lots of declarations of its future and
its success and it's going to be great.
And there was just one board member who
was from the tech industry and from the
telecom industry who
called me and said,
"There's nothing I can do to stop it.
This is madness." [music] And um
Yeah, and and and and it was just jaw on
the floor. I I
I just never experienced anything like
that. And
and I didn't see it coming. And and how
could somebody be
so blind to something like that when uh
it's such a consequential decision.
We'll be right back.
Jim and I both went to Trinity College
at the University of Toronto, which was
and still is the smallest and the
snobbiest of the colleges that make up
the University of Toronto. I met Jim in
the first few weeks of freshman year. I
had just turned 17. I just had eye
surgery. So, I had a huge scar running
down the side of my face, a massive
afro, lots of acne, maybe 110 lb, and
all the wrong clothes. I was from a
small town way off in the countryside.
Here I was at swanky Trinity, and I had
no idea how the fancy kids dressed, and
no money to do anything about it.
I had a moment of truth.
I need to figure out how to fit in.
Jim lived across the hall from me. He
taught me how to play backgammon.
I played endless games of touch football
with him. I had a beloved jade tree that
I called William F. Buckley, and he used
to steal Buckley from my room and put
him in some perilous place.
And I think the reason that I felt a
certain affinity with Jim
is that I sensed he shared my urgency
about fitting in. Only it was going to
be much harder for him than me.
First of all,
he was from Peterborough.
Nobody was from Peterborough. He had
further to climb.
And second, he was really, really
ambitious. I mean, I was ambitious, but
not like Jim.
Jim wanted it more.
Do you remember
what was it like when you came to
college to university?
Do you What What What What's What's your
account of your kind of first year at
Trinity? Uh well, it was very
intimidating. I found these people from
tremendous privilege [music] and just
very, very intimidating and meeting
people with
>> [music]
>> stellar backgrounds. I'd never been on
an airplane. I'd never been outside of
Ontario. Uh
very modest background.
Yeah, just tremendously intimidating.
[music]
But I mean, I was smart, but then you'd
see Robertson Davies at
high table and sometimes his friend
Northrop Frye there and
it's like, Dorothy, this is not Kansas
anymore.
Just so you know,
Robertson Davies and Northrop Frye were
two of the biggest Canadian intellectual
celebrities of that era. And we'd see
them out our window walking through the
college quadrangle.
God out for a stroll.
For those of us from the sticks,
this seemed unbelievable.
So, we just to remember
you and I in You were across the hall in
our second year.
And I remember there were How many
people were on our floor? 13 people on
our floor or something like that?
I remember telling my dad, I can't
>> Max. Max.
>> Max. Maybe 12. It was like private
school kids and
kids who went to Upper Canada College,
you know, and kids who went to
It was Did you feel like
you had to work harder to
prove yourself in that world? What What
was your What was your kind of cycle?
>> Well, I worked all the time. As a kid, I
had five or six paper routes, four five
paper routes almost all the time, and
then I got summer and winter jobs from
grade seven on. I bought my own clothes.
I I still to this day have my own pants
>> [laughter]
>> and darned socks. Yeah, I can darn socks
with the best of them. I sew my own
buttons on because you you learn how to
do it, and I'll sit there, watch the
news, and sew up my clothes all the
time. It's very very funny. I I get I
just enjoy sewing and and but I always
sewed I hemmed my own clothes. I I
stitched in my shirts. I
I I darned socks. Yeah, it's funny
thing, right? When something rips, I'll
I'll
Yeah, my wife says, "Why don't you buy a
new pair of sweatpants?" I said, "Well,
[laughter]
I can fix those." And uh it's very
funny. So, I'll sit there with a big
thing and Yeah. do [clears throat] a a
catch stitch on it and uh
Yeah, and then and so you work all the
time, and then you you go to school, and
you you know, I would
>> [clears throat]
>> I would do the math club, and I'd go to
basketball, and then I'd
go out to a party, and then I'd work all
weekend. So, yeah, I just I just I work
every day.
Jim went off to Harvard Business School
right after graduation.
He could have gotten a job anywhere, but
he chose RIM right near where I grew up
in Waterloo, Ontario. And RIM's rise was
swift.
It's important to understand that
uh
that and
that
Apple launched the iPhone in January
2007.
And in response, there was a very
aggressive selling and marketing and
device function.
Apple supercharged the smartphone
category the same way Starbucks
supercharged cappuccinos and in the
beginning RIM was able to ride that
wave.
So when they they launched in 2007 we
were 3 billion sales. The next year we
grew to 6. The next year we grew to 11
billion. The next year we grew to 15.
The next year we grew to 20 billion.
Fortune had us in the middle of that
time the fastest growing company in the
world. Smarter and sleeker. Now with
real-time turn-by-turn GPS navigation.
It has the intelligence you require with
the beauty you desire. The all-new
BlackBerry Curve. I would drive through
Waterloo in those years and see building
after building after building with the
big RIM logo on it.
Even today my mom lives across the
street from a giant recreational center
donated to the city by RIM back in that
era. RIM Park.
It is impossible not to have a certain
amount of pride and affection for the
guy who used to steal your jade tree and
ended up a billionaire.
And then at the very height of
BlackBerry's success Jim wanted to go
left and the board of directors wanted
to go right.
But Jim B,
this is a a good moment for a reflection
here.
How are they not with you? You you built
this thing.
You've been the strategic force behind
this extraordinary company. You're
you know, the the device is in the hands
of
the president of the United States. I
mean like
how how how is it that they could look
at
that they would see what you had done
for the company and look at come to this
crucial fork in the road and not even
they don't even seem interested in your
option.
Yeah, well Mike and the new CEO Thorsten
didn't they were hardware people
and
Mike did say
>> [music]
>> right that in the end in a meeting
before the board meeting if we do this
it'll kill hardware and and I said
hardware is already dead.
And um
and it was like I told him his dog just
got hit by a car.
When you look at your
what you did what what where do you
think the mistake lay?
I think it's many things that you're
touching on. One is for sure you're busy
cuz you're flying around the world
trying to enact this shift.
I underestimated how a strategic shift
is
is hard for people. They they you'd much
rather have a continuum.
Yeah, and more time
for sure more more preparation more
persuasion. I I I did not spend the time
I needed to. I I I'd always driven the
decisions and they'd always been
yes, of course we'll do what I'm pushing
and
but ultimately the board held the power.
So underestimated their power
underestimated [clears throat]
how
they were sold in their way of thinking.
If we cut to the bottom line here
is you you have a
a notion of where the company's future
lies which turns out in retrospect to be
accurate, right? You always was the only
path.
There was no path.
The
the the right word for the road was only
going to lead to disaster. There was no
path that Blockbuster was going to
emerge a winner by focusing on hardware.
>> Yeah, there's no there's no debate on
that now. Yeah. There was at
at least a a decent probability it could
have come out on top or at least a very
healthy in the other path.
You had you came up with this idea you
had enormous amount of intellectual
confidence in the accuracy of your
decision.
Um but what you
uh what you overestimated was
that you thought that that that having a
great idea
well supported by evidence
would be sufficient to win over a group
of intelligent people. And what you
discovered was actually no.
A room full of allegedly intelligent
people need more than an intellectual
argument to win them over.
They need to have You need to go out to
dinner with them
seven times and at a lovely restaurant
and
hold their hand and kind of you know,
make them feel like they're wanted and
needed and that you're someone who they
can trust, etc. etc. etc. That was the
It was all that soft stuff
that you underestimated the importance
of. You thought it was
What you needed was What you needed to
be You thought what what was What was
most important was to be right.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. And
Yeah, no. I I do a lot kind of in I do a
lot in public policy and my wife
makes a joke. She says, "Jim's motto is
why convince when you can confuse?"
By the way, what's Jim doing as all this
is going on?
Trying to buy a National Hockey League
franchise. The Pittsburgh Penguins in
2006, the Nashville Predators in 2007,
the Phoenix Coyotes in 2009.
In each case, the franchises were
struggling financially. And Jim proposed
to move them to a big city in Southern
Ontario called Hamilton.
Was Jim right to want to do this? Of
course, he was. Southern Ontario is home
to 14 million people and at present has
just one hockey team, the Toronto Maple
Leafs, which is absolutely bananas.
There could easily be three or even four
more franchises in the Toronto region.
And each would be more successful than
almost any franchise in the entire
league.
But could Jim convince the other owners
to let him do it? No, he couldn't.
I'm wondering
isn't the Penguin's story
a version of this?
That
that was another case where
you were right.
The Penguin should not be in Pittsburgh.
The Penguin should be in Hamilton,
right? You were 100%
correct. The future of the league, this
is a terribly run league by a bunch of
idiots who have not understood that
Canada is the natural home for as way
too few hockey teams. And Hamilton is
would be 100 times better
as a home for the Penguins than
Pittsburgh, right? You're So, in both
instances, the story of Black
Blackberries Fork in the Road and the
story of the Penguins, you are correct.
And in both instances, you cannot
convince the board, in one case the rest
of the owners, and in the other case the
board of the company.
They you cannot convince them of the
100% accuracy of your position.
Had you done this
>> No, I I think they're different cuz one
just was never meant One was a was just
never meant to be. It wasn't ever
[music]
They weren't going to allow it to
happen. Was it never going to happen?
Is the one blind spot in the otherwise
sublime mind of a man like Jim that he
can't see how he could have made it
happen?
You were Let me Let me Let me Let me
just I just want to one last point about
Pittsburgh. The Penguins.
I'm going to imagine a completely
different Jim.
Imagine I'm going to Imagine if you are
the schmoozer of schmoozers.
You are the most kind of gregarious,
backslapping,
you're everyone, you know, you're like
this beloved social You spend and you
had wined and dined and got to know
every single owner in the in the NHL.
And then you would said to them, you buy
the Penguins and then you say to them,
Guys
This is a bad hockey market. I think let
me talk to you about a future of the
league where blah blah blah blah blah
blah right? Is there not a version if
you can't do it cuz that's not who you
are.
But imagine a version of yourself where
I shave off
40 IQ points
and I give you a
a a beer belly
and a and an Oshacks like
you know, and an endless appetite for
martinis and steaks and I send you on a
tour of all the good old boys who run
NHL franchises.
Do you get your way if you do it that
way if you're that person?
In hindsight I don't think if I I say
no chance.
>> come on.
Really?
Oh, come on Jim. This is your mistake.
This is your blind spot.
Doesn't this drive you Why does Why am I
the only one who's driven crazy by this?
They're morons. They're morons.
>> Well, it would have been very very
profitable. There's no question. We had
the facility and we had the real estate.
Yeah, it would have been very very
profitable.
>> of hockey fans in the entire world. With
hockey fans with money in an underserved
market who can't get any tickets to the
Toronto Maple
>> that's that's the map. That's the map.
>> [music]
>> Several times during our conversation,
Jim used the word heretic to describe
the way other people at RIM, the board
and everyone else viewed him.
And I think it's the perfect word.
The heretic is the person who strays
from the orthodoxy but not [music]
quietly or passively. The heretic does
it loudly without regard for everyone
else's sensibilities.
I said at the beginning [music]
that when Jim and I came to Trinity from
the sticks, both of us were engaged in
the project of figuring out how to fit
in.
We came in with chips on our shoulders
and we had to find a way to remove them
without calling too much attention to
ourselves.
I think I was better at that than he
was.
My Jade tree, William F. Buckley,
kept getting stolen because in 1980s
Canada, to openly affiliate with a
conservative like William F. Buckley,
was a provocation.
So, when I got a second jade tree, I
called it Run-DMC [music] Tree.
I put the lyrics on the side of the pot.
I'm a sucker jade tree, can't grow much
higher. All you other jade trees can
call me sire.
And no one ever stole my Run-DMC Tree.
There were simple ways to appease the
orthodoxy.
But I don't think Jim really ever wanted
to appease anyone.
>> [music]
>> I think he just wanted to find the hole
in the hedge.
It's how he got out of Peterborough.
It's how he made his way to Trinity.
It's how he turned a little startup into
a juggernaut.
There's a famous psychology experiment
from the 1950s where infant monkeys are
taken from their mothers and given a
choice between two inanimate surrogates.
Cloth mother
toy mother monkey that's soft and cuddly
and wire mother a surrogate made out of
steel wire holding a banana.
Which do they choose?
Cloth mother.
They went for short-term comfort over
long-term survival.
At the end of the day, I think the RIM
board wanted a cloth mother.
And Jim was wire mother.
They weren't rejecting BlackBerry
Messenger.
They were rejecting Jim.
And maybe Jim's mistake was simply that
he didn't understand [music] that for
the rest of us monkeys a banana isn't
enough.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Revisionist History is produced by Nina
Bird Lawrence, Lucy Sullivan, and Ben
Naddaff Haft and Hafrey. Our editor is
Karen Shukurji. Fact-checking [music] by
Angeli Mercado. Our executive producer
is Jacob Smith. Engineering by Nina Bird
Lawrence. Original music by Luis Guerra.
Sound design and mastering by Marcelo de
Oliveira.
I'm Malcolm Gladwell.
>> [music]